The amazing Spotted Climbing Perch is able to 'gulp' oxygen from the air and can crawl over land using its strong pectoral fins in search of water.
American Lobsters have longer life spans than both cats and dogs, living over 20 years.
Catfish have over 27,000 taste buds, whereas humans have only 9,000.
What is the loudest fish? The answer is, the croaker.
What percentage of a fish's size is made up of brain? Fish typically have quite small brains relative to body size compared with other vertebrates, typically one-fifteenth (0.06 per cent) the brain mass of a similarly sized bird or mammal.
Fish can get sunburned, but it is unusual unless there is something about their environment that does not allow them to seek deeper water or some kind of shelter.
Which kind of fish can live in the coldest temperatures? The answer is the Antarctic ice fish, which have antifreeze in their blood, live permanently at -1°C.
Is it true that a fish surrounds itself by its snot to protect itself? Yes - parrotfish produce a mucus "tent" that completely covers them.
Fish have a specialised sense organ called their lateral line, which works much like radar and helps them navigate in dark or murky water?
It was not until 1853 in London, UK, when aeration and filtration of water was understood, that people were able to keep fish as indoor pets.
The word "halibut" means "holy flatfish" (hali=holy + butte=flatfish) because it was only eaten on holy days.
Most fish reproduce by laying eggs, though some fish, such as great white sharks, give birth to live babies called pups.
Lungfish can live out of water for several years. It secretes a mucus cocoon and burrows itself under the unbaked earth. It takes in air with its lung through a built-in breathing tube that leads to the surface. A lungfish has both gills and a lung.
Some fish, such as the great white shark, can raise their body temperature. This helps them hunt for prey in cold water.
The oldest known age for a fish was an Australian lungfish. In 2003, it was still alive and well at 65 years old.
Fish use a variety of low-pitched sounds to convey messages to each other. They moan, grunt, croak, boom, hiss, whistle, creak, shriek, and wail. They rattle their bones and gnash their teeth. However, fish do not have vocal chords. They use other parts of their bodies to make noises, such as vibrating muscles against their swim bladder.
Fish can form schools containing millions of fish. They use their eyes and something called a lateral line to hold their places in the school. The lateral line is a row of pores running along the fish’s sides from head to tail. Special hairs in the pores sense changes in water pressure from the movements of other fish or predators.
Starfish are not fish. Neither are jellyfish. Starfish don't have a brain or blood.
Since a fish’s jaw is not attached to its skull, many fishes can shoot their mouths forward like a spring to catch startled prey.
Electric eels and electric rays have enough electricity to kill a horse.
Sharks are the only fish that have eyelids.
Fish have sleep-like periods where they have lowered response to stimuli, slowed physical activity, and reduced metabolism but they do not share the same changes in brain waves as humans do when they sleep.
Some fish, such as the herbivorous fish (grazers), often lack jaw teeth but have tooth-like grinding mills in their throats called pharyngeal teeth.
Most fish have taste buds all over their body.
An estimated one third of male fish in British waters are changing sex due to pollution in human sewage.
Saltwater fish need to drink more water than freshwater fish. Since seawater is saltier than the liquids in a fish’s body, water inside the fish is constantly flowing out. If they didn’t drink to replace the lost water, saltwater fish would dry up like prunes.
The oldest fishhook ever found dates back to about 42,000 years ago.
Most fish have little salt in them. Sharks, however, have meat as salty as the ocean they live in.
Most brands of lipstick contain fish scales.
Most fish can see in color and use colors to camouflage themselves or defend themselves and their territory. Most fish have the best possible eyesight for their habitat and can most certainly see you peering at them in a fish tank. Some fish can see polarized and ultraviolet light.
A fish does not add new scales as it grows, but the scales it has increase in size. In this way, growth rings are formed and the rings reveal the age of a fish.
Fish that have thin fins with a split tail indicate that they move very quickly or may need them to cover great distances. On the other had, fish that live among rocks and reefs near the ocean floor have broad lateral fin and large tails.
A ship has a heavy keel in the lower part to keep it from capsizing. Fish, on the other hand, have the keel on top. If the paired fins stop functioning to keep the fish balanced, the fish turns over because its heaviest part tends to sink, which happens when it dies.
On average, flying fish can glide 160 feet (50m), but have been known to glide as far as 660 feet (200 m). And they can reach heights up to 19 feet (6m).
An inflated porcupine fish can reach a diameter of up to 35 inches (90 cm). It puffs up by swallowing water and then storing it in its stomach. The stomach increases in size with more water. If the fish is taken out of water, it can inflate in a similar way by swallowing air.
A fish can drown in water. Like humans, fish need oxygen, so if there isn’t enough oxygen in the water, they will suffocate.
Although the fangtooth fish is only a few inches long, it has teeth about the size of a human’s. Their teeth are so big that they can't close their mouths completely.
The fish in the middle of a school control the school. The fish on the outside are guided by those in the middle. Only bony fish can swim in highly coordinated groups.
Most fish cannot swim backwards. Those that can are mainly members of one of the eel families.
Fish would suffocate if they tried to chew because chewing would interfere with water passing over their gills.
The biggest fish in the world is the giant whale shark, which can grow to nearly 60 feet, or the length of two school buses. It weighs over 25 tons and eats mainly plankton. It has over 4,000 teeth, though they are only 3 mm long.
The most poisonous fish in the world is the stone fish. Its sting can cause shock, paralysis, and even death if not treated within a few hours.
The word “piranha” is from the Tupi (Brazil) pira nya and means “scissors.” Found in freshwater rivers in South America, piranhas have razor-sharp teeth. They typically eat fish, insects, seeds, fruit, and even larger animals such as horses. While there are no proven reports of piranhas killing a person, they do eat human carcasses.
The fastest fish is the sailfish. It can swim as fast as a car travels on the highway.
Seahorses are the only fish that swim upright. Seahorses are poor swimmers and can die of exhaustion in stormy waters.
The slowest fish is a seahorse. It swims so slowly that a person can barely tell it is moving. The slowest is the Dwarf Seahorse, which takes about one hour to travel five feet. It even looks like it is simply standing up, not swimming.
Some fish do not have scales. Sharks, for example, have rough sandpapery skin instead of scales.
Fish have multiple Christian and pre-Christian overtones. For example, the Greek word for fish is Ichthys, which is an acronym for “Jesus Christ, God’s Son, Savior” and was used to mark early Christian tombs and meeting places. Because of their association with fertility, fish have also been linked to Isis and Aphrodite.
In Japan, the fugu, or puffer fish, is a succulent but lethal delicacy. It contains tetrodotoxin, a deadly poison. However, it is so delicious that Japanese gourmets risk their lives to prepare it. To make this high-risk dish, chefs must have a certificate from a special school that teaches preparation of this toxic fish.
Hammerhead sharks can live in schools of more than 500 sharks. The strongest female swims in the middle. When she is ready to mate, she shakes her head from side to side to signal the other female sharks to move away so she is the center of attention.
Some desert pupfish can live in hot springs that reach temperatures greater than 113° F.
A male emperor angelfish lives together with up to five female mates. If the emperor angelfish dies, one of the females turns into a male fish and becomes the leader of the group.
The mudskipper is a fish that spends most of its time out of water and can “walk” on its fins. It carries a portable water supply in its gill chambers when it leaves the water. It can also breathe through the pores of its wet skin. Mudskippers are also able to jump 2 feet in the air.
There are approximately 32,000 different kinds of fish in the world today, which is more than all the other kinds of vertebrates combined. Scientists are discovering new species all the time.
The batfish plays dead when danger is near. It floats motionless on its side when scared, making it look like a dead leaf floating on the surface of the water.
Anableps, four-eyed fish, can see above and below water at the same time.
Sometimes tornadoes pick up fish while traveling over water and carry them over land, where the fish rain down. These “fish showers” have been happening for thousands of years. Roman writer Pliny the Younger describes this phenomenon in the 1st century A.D.
Male anglerfish are much smaller than the female. While the female can reach up to 24 inches long, the males barely reach 1.6 inches long and live as parasites on their mates. They stay together for life. As the male ages, he gets smaller and smaller. The female anglerfish’s light is always “on.”
Scientists have explored only 1% of the ocean depths. They believe millions of new kinds of animals and fish are down there, waiting to be discovered.
Empty dogfish egg cases sometimes wash up onto the beach. Some people call them mermaid purses.
Humans have been amazed for centuries that salmon, after journeying across the ocean, can find the river where they were born. In the Yukon River in Alaska and in Canada, certain tagged Chinook salmon covered nearly 2,000 miles in 60 days. Salmon also have adapted to live in a variety of aquatic environments, including rivers, lakes, estuaries, coral reefs, and the open sea.
Fish were the first vertebrates with bony skeletons to appear on Earth. Unlike today’s fish, early fish had no scales, fins, or jawbone, but they did have a dorsal fin.
Hagfish are some of the slimiest animals on earth. An Atlantic hagfish can make enough slime in one minute to fill a bucket.
Unlike bony fish, sharks and rays do not have swim bladders. They have to swim all the time, even when they are sleeping. Otherwise, they will sink to the bottom of the ocean.
A seahorse can move each of its eyes separately. One eye can look forward while the other looks backward. Seahorses can also change their color to match their surroundings.
The term “fish” is used when referring to one species of fish (e.g., 10 salmon are 10 fish). The term “fishes” is used when referring to more than one species (e.g., 10 salmon, 3 trout, and 1 angel fish are 14 fishes).
Unlike most other fish, the ocean sunfish does not have a tail. A female sunfish can lay 300 million eggs each year. Each egg is smaller than the period at the end of this sentence.
Lampreys and hagfish are the most primitive form of fish still living today. Lampreys are jawless and have a round sucker-like mouth.
Most types of seahorses pair for life. Female seahorses lay their eggs inside a pouch on the male seahorse’s belly. When the babies are ready to hatch, the male holds onto a piece of seaweed with his tail and rocks back and forth until the babies pop out of his pouch.
The freshwater Pygmy and Luzon gobies of the Philippines, the saltwater Marshal Islands goby, and the tiny rice fish from Thailand all reach a maximum length of 1/2", roughly the size of a grain of rice. They are typically considered the world’s smallest fishes.
A baby seahorse is called a "fry."
The number of people who fish for sport in America—about 40 million—outnumbers all the country’s golf and tennis players combined.
The world’s largest fish is the whale shark, which can grow to 12 meters (40 feet) long and weigh an average of 19,000 kilograms (42,000 pounds).
The world’s smallest fish is Paedocypris progenetica, and was only recently discovered in the last decade. Scientists discovered it living in the forest swamps on the Indonesian island of Sumatra. Mature females measure just 7.9 millimeters (0.31 inch).
Greenland Sharks are fish species with the longest known lifespan. An examination of 28 specimens in one study published in 2016 determined by radiocarbon dating that the oldest of the animals that they sampled had lived for about 392 ± 120 years (a minimum of 272 years and a maximum of 512 years).
Koi, a Japanese species of fish, allegedly living up to 200 years, though generally not exceeding 50 – A specimen named Hanako was reportedly 226 years old upon her death.
A tiny coral reef-dwelling fish called the pygmy goby (Eviota sigillata) is the shortest-lived fish. The pygmy goby lives an average of 59 days, pipping the previous record holder, an African fish which lives for just over two-and-a-half months.
Freshwater fish do not actively drink water, but absorb the water through their skin and gills. On the other hand, saltwater fish do actively drink sea water. Their gills process the water and take out the salt.
In most fish respiration takes place through gills. Lungfish, however, possess one or two lungs. The labyrinth fish have developed a special organ that allows them to take advantage of the oxygen of the air, but is not a true lung.
Not all fish have scales. While scales are a characteristic of most fish, some fish, such as clingfish, lampreys and catfish, do not have scales.
Fish have sleep-like periods where they have lowered response to stimuli, slowed physical activity, and reduced metabolism but they do not share the same changes in brain waves as humans do when they sleep.
Some fish species can make audible sounds like clicks or croaks but most fish communicate with body language. Certain species will flare out their gill plates the same way a cat would raise the hair on their back.
Fish can form schools containing millions of fish. They use their eyes and something called a lateral line to hold their places in the school. The lateral line is a row of pores running along the fish’s sides from head to tail. Special hairs in the pores sense changes in water pressure from the movements of other fish or predators.
Some Fish, like the Triggerfish, can swim backward.
On average, flying fish can glide 50 meters (160 feet), but have been known to glide as far as 400 meters (1,300 feet). And they can reach heights up to 6 meters (20 feet).
A robotic fish was accepted by other fish and became their leader during an experiment by New York University.
The most common fish is any of the species of a deepwater fish sometimes called a "bristle mouth." The fish is about the size of a small minnow. It is caught at 500 meters or deeper all over the world.
Scientists can figure out how old a fish is by counting growth rings on its scales or its ear bones (called "otoliths"). The rings mark seasonal changes in fish growth, like the annual rings in tree trunks.
Fish would suffocate if they tried to chew their food. Chewing would interfere with the passage of water over the gills, necessary for obtaining oxygen. Carnivorous fish like sharks use their sharp teeth to seize and hold prey while swallowing it whole or in large pieces. Bottom dwellers such as rays are equipped with large flat teeth that crush the shellfish they consume. Herbivorous fish (grazers) often lack jaw teeth, but have tooth-like grinding mills in their throats, called pharyngeal teeth.
The Kemp's ridley turtle is the rarest of all sea turtles. It weighs between 80-100 pounds and the mature adult is an olive green color. They nest in large numbers known as "arribadas."
When they are active, sea turtles must swim to the ocean surface to breathe every few minutes. When they are resting, they can remain underwater for as long as 2 hours without breathing.
The leatherback is the largest sea turtle. Individuals have attained a shell length of 6 feet and weights of 1,400 pounds. Unlike other species of sea turtle, the leatherback does not have scales. Instead, it is covered with a firm, rubbery skin with seven longitudinal ridges or keels.
Most crabs "walk" or run across the ocean bottom. Some, such as the commercially-caught blue crab of the Atlantic coast can swim. Their rearmost pair of legs is modified for swimming and their legs are paddle-shaped.
Crabs grow by shedding their shell once they've outgrown it. The rigid shell imprisons the crab and limits growth. Once the shell is shed, the crab can absorb water and expand into its new-grown shell.
Because bivalves are filter-feeders, they remove particles from the water by pumping water past their filtering apparatus and capturing nutrients from the plankton they eat. They can help filter pollution from land and may be used in water quality restoration projects. If shellfish are removed from marine environment, such as when harvested for food in aquaculture, it will also recycle nutrients from the sea back to land.
The blue whale may be the largest animal ever to inhabit the earth. Blue whales can grow up to 31 meters (100 feet)—roughly the length of a basketball court. Blue whales have weighed up to 160 tons. They feed on small shrimp-like crustaceans. The whales consume up to eight tons of these animals a day during their feeding period.
Found in cool, coastal waters around the world, great whites are the largest predatory fish on Earth. They grow to an average of 15 feet in length, though specimens exceeding 20 feet and weighing up to 5,000 pounds have been recorded.
Great White sharks have muscles that generate heat to keep their core warm, unlike many other shark species.
Sharks have no true bones.
Great White sharks can detect one drop of blood in 25 gallons of water.
Flatfish begin life symmetrically, as regular-looking fish with eyes on either side of their head. About a month into their development, the fry undergo a metamorphosis: Their skull shape begins to change, and one eye begins to migrate over the fish’s head to join the other. Their pigment also changes, making them light on their belly side and dark on their back—a type of camouflage called countershading.
The Latin name for the southern flounder is Paralichthys lethosigma, meaning "parallel fish that lost its spots."
Also known as the paiche or the pirarucu, the arapaima is an air-breathing fish that plies the rainforest rivers of South America's Amazon Basin and nearby lakes and swamps. One of the world's largest freshwater fish species, these giants can grow up to 15 feet long and weigh up to 440 pounds, though fish that big have not been reported for many years. More commonly, they’re about six feet long and 200 pounds.
Arapaimas can survive up to 24 hours out of the water.
The snout of the largetooth sawfish is made up of 14-25 teeth.
The blood of European eels is poisonous, but cooking can make the animals safe for people to eat.
Eels can sometimes slither out of the water and across land to reach new habitats or find food.
To be less visible in the water, most fishes are counter shaded. They are darker on top, lighter or silver on their sides and brightest on their bellies.
Fishes make a lot of noises to convey their messages. Even though they don’t have vocal cords, they use other parts to moan, grunt, boom, hiss, creak, shriek and wail.
Fish secrete a type of mucus from their skin. This slime coating is important because it provides protection against parasites and diseases, covers wounds to prevent infection and helps fish move through the water faster.
Fishes such as Wrasses and Parrotfishes are all born female, with only a few individuals becoming male later in their life. Contrariwise, Clownfishes are all born male – and later when the existing female(s) die, the most dominant male(s) become female.
Science now generally recognizes the Conodontia as the first true fish. Their fossil remains reach back as far as 515 million years ago and looked like small Hagfish (less than 7cm or 3.5 in long).
The largest ever fish was a shark as far as we know. But not the whale Shark of our modern seas. Instead the title must go to a giant relative of the Great White Shark called the Megalodon Shark or Megatooth Shark (Carcharodon megalodon).
Acanthonus armatus – a deep sea Cusp Eel – has the smallest brain, relative to body size, of any fish, or even of any vertebrate.
The electric organs in the Electric Eel can occupy as much as 80% of the animals body and an average specimen can deliver 1 amp at 400 volts!
The largest fish egg known to science, in the strictest sense of the word, is the egg of the Coelocanth (Latimeria chalumnae). It is round, with a diameter of between 9 cm and 7.5 cm – and can weigh as much as 325 grams or 11.6 ounces.
Fish have less blood per gram of body weight than mammals, normally between 3% and 8% of a fish’s body weight is blood. However in the hagfish and lampreys it is greater, for them between 8% and 20% of the animal’s body weight.
A fish’s heart has four chambers. But unlike us, the chambers of their heart are not all muscular and are not so built into a single organ. Rather they are located one behind the other. This is particularly evident in the sharks and rays.
A Pike (Essox lucius) has a brain that amounts to only 0.077 percent of its total body mass. Which means that when you catch a 5 kilogram Pike, you have out maneuvered a fish with a brain weighing 3.85 grams – or one seventh of an ounce.
Burbot (Lota lota) is a little smarter because it has a brain that is 0.13 percent of its body weight. Meaning a 5 kilo specimen would have a 6.5 gram brain, still its is a pretty dumb fish. Most fish have brains that are less than 1 percent of their body weight, but not all.
While we who live in the air can often see for several kilometres – sometimes even more than 20 km – a fish is lucky if it can see for 50 metres… and generally it can see for far less than this.
The Mud Skippers, Periopthalmus sp., have their eyes placed on prominent turrets allowing good all round vision. When they are out on the mud they can also withdraw their eyes into the turret to clean and lubricate them.
The jellyfish’s mouth is found in the centre of its body. From this small opening it both eats and discards waste. And it serves another purpose, too – by squirting a jet of water from its mouth, the jellyfish can propel forward!
Jellyfish digest their food, which consists of fish, shrimp, crabs and tiny plants, very quickly. If they didn’t, they wouldn’t be able to float, being weighed down by the large, undigested grub in their body
The Kissing Gourami is a peach and silver colored fish with larger than normal lips for a Gourami. The Kissing Gourami is a normally tolerant species of fish, but the “kissing” that this fish does is actually how the fish fights with other males of its kind. Yep, you could call it the first gay tropical fish that's officially proud of who it is!
The Sumatra Puffer is also known as the Figure 8 Puffer. It is a deep brown color on the upper half of its body, with a white underside. Markings on its back resemble little figure of eights. The Samutara Puffer has a very expressive face due to its facial anatomy.
Despite their name, the Blind Cave Tetra have really good eyesight to begin with, but as mature adults they lose their sight.
The Yo-Yo Loach is named for the markings on its body that appear to be Y’s and O’s.
The female Pindu Fish incubates her eggs in her mouth and releases the fry when the the eggs hatch.
The Upside-Down Jellyfish spends its life upside-down to other species of Jellyfish, because algae lives inside the jelly’s tissues allowing the jelly to take advantage of the process of Photosynthesis and feed off of the food the algae inside it produces.
The Archer Fish actually “fire” at prey with a a strong and accurate small jet of water.

